# A Review of DiRT Directory - Digital Research Tools
##### by Caroline Dres
### Introduction

A successful digital humanities project should have a clear trajectory and definition of the project's intended purpose.  A common mistake in the development of the project requirements is that many contributors are too ambitious or too broad with the project goals.  The DH project can easily become very general instead of adaptive as it was initially intended to be.  When a project does not have a clear focus it can lose touch with the intended user.  Additionally, if the project has too many components it can be difficult to test during the software development process, which is problematic when checking to ensure the project is meeting the original requirements.  In creating a successful DH project, it is necessary that the development should be a collaborative process across the humanistic and STEM fields.  Another common issue project teams face is when most of the focus is placed on the development of the software.  As a result, the project easily loses focus with the humanistic aspect.  A successful team should carefully analyze and consider the humanistic scholarship equally as important as the software development.

### Concept and Content

The DiRT Directory website was created for the purpose of allowing users to easily find and compare resources for Humanistic research by providing a wide ranging list of research tools, including everything from content management systems and statistical analysis packages to music OCR and mindmapping software.  When first visiting the homepage of the DiRT Directory, the purpose of the website seems clear with a descriptive title and a short introduction to the site.  This introduction includes all that the site attempts to accomplish as well as all that a user can find on the website.  The site is easy to navigate, guiding you directly to a sourced link to a research tool website best suited for your needs.  The only downfall to this model is that the DiRT Directory relies heavily on the research tool websites to accomplish what they are claiming to accomplish.  This requires the DiRT Directory project team to carefully analyze these research tools prior to sourcing them to ensure the site’s success.  Overall, the DiRT Directory has a clear trajectory, makes effective use of its data and properly sites other DH projects, collaborators, contributors and funders.

### Design and Technique

A successful project design should complement the content of the project and highlight its various components.  The DiRT Directory’s design does a good job of serving that purpose with a simple, visually clean and easy to use layout.  The homepage has a short introduction to the site followed by a list of types of resources, entitled “I need a digital research tool to…”.  Also on the homepage is a sidebar containing a search bar, an “About” section and a “News” section.  The "About" section is quite redundant, repeating what was already stated in the introduction.  The "News: section, however, is quite useful, informing the user of new features available and new projects DiRT is working on.  The only improvement that could be made is that the initial visual appeal to this website is not very strong because of the use of dull colors, the small logo and the lack of eye-catching elements.  On the other hand, this design, however boring, may be quite intentional.  A simple, clean and perhaps boring design allows for easy use of a complex site with many components.  A visually stimulating website could easily make for confusion and difficulty in use.  It is to be debated whether it is more important to catch the eye and intrigue of the user, or to keep the design as simple as possible to ensure easy use.

### Collaboration and Documentation

The DiRT Directory was developed as user base and digital research tool website born out of the ashes of Project Bamboo, a humanities cyberinfrastructure initiative developed in a collaboration between UC Berkley and the University of Chicago.  Project Bamboo failed to connect with humanist scholars and its issues stemmed from the project’s lack of focus and direction.  By contrast, DiRT directory was developed with a clear purpose, fixed requirements and has a set of volunteers from diverse backgrounds to keep the site relevant.  DiRT Directory’s collaboration with other projects and amongst its own associates has contributed to its success.  The DiRT Directory keeps a well-documented list of all new updates and added components to the site, listing dates, collaborators and contributors.  This “News” section is incredibly helpful for users to understand the new features and developments.  As for future development, DiRT Directory does not seem to have a clear plan.  However, in a recent update, contributors stated clearly that they do not intend to try and make the directory a social place for registered users to share which research tools they are using, while still allowing users to see what groups and organization are using what research tools.  DiRT Driectory's main goal is to stay relevant and useful.

### Conclusion

In conclusion, DiRT Directory is an overall very successful DH project.  While its design is not as visually appealing as other DH projects, it has a clear purpose and its content reflects that purpose.  The website is easily navigable with very organized documentation of productive collaboration across the Humanistic and STEM fields.
